Stream processing 2 (#5)
mkuthan/mkuthan.github.io: _posts/2022-03-08-stream-processing-part2.md

---
title: "Stream Processing - Part 2"
date: 2022-03-08
categories: [stream processing, apache beam, scala]
tagline: Apache Beam - dynamic aggregation
header:
    overlay_image: /assets/images/forest-simon-yQ1IDlOe-6k-unsplash.webp
    overlay_filter: 0.2
---

This is the second part of the [stream processing](/categories/stream-processing/) blog post series.

> In the first [part](/blog/2022/01/28/stream-processing-part1/) I presented aggregations in a fixed, non-overlapping window.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the first [part](/blog/2022/01/28/stream-processing-part1/) I presented aggregations in a fixed, non-overlapping windows.
```

Now you will learn dynamic aggregations in data-driven window, 

> when the size of the window depends on the input data themselves instead of predefined time based pattern.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now you will learn dynamic aggregations in data-driven windows, 
for which the size of each window depends on the input data instead of a predefined time based pattern.
```

At the end, I also show the complex triggering policy to get speculative results for the latency sensitive pipelines.

## User sessions

> One of the most popular dynamic aggregations is a session window. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One of the most popular dynamic aggregations is based on a session window.
```

The single session captures user activities within some period of time followed by the gap of inactivity.

As an example, the following stream of user activities is ingested from hypothetical mobile e-commerce application:

```
"00:00:00" -> "open app"
"00:01:30" -> "show product"
"00:03:00" -> "add to cart"
"00:13:00" -> "checkout"
"00:13:10" -> "close app"
```

The activities should be aggregated into a single session if the maximum allowed gap between the activities is equal or greater than 10 minutes
(the longest gap is between "add to cart" and "checkout" events):

```
00:23:10 -> "open app", "show product", "add to cart", "checkout", "close app"
```

If the allowed gap between activities is shorter, e.g. for 5 minutes gap we will get two independent sessions:

```
00:08:00 -> "open app", "show product", "add to cart"
00:18:10 -> "checkout", "close app"
```

> This is an over-simplified aggregation example just for the blog academic purposes, notice that it does not scale at all. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is an over-simplified aggregation example just for the blog academic purposes. Careful reader will notice that it does not scale at all. 
```

* Conversion rate

I'm going to follow the TDD technique again, so the implementation of the aggregation method will not be disclosed until the very end of the blog post.
As for now, the following method signature should be enough to understand all scenarios:

```scala
type User = String
type Activity = String

def activitiesInSessionWindow(
  userActions: SCollection[(User, Activity)],
  gapDuration: Duration,
): SCollection[(User, Iterable[Activity])]
```

## No activities, no sessions

If the input stream of activities is empty the aggregation should not emit any session.

```scala
"No activities" should "create empty session" in runWithContext { sc =>
  val activities = testStreamOf[(User, Activity)].advanceWatermarkToInfinity()

  val results = activitiesInSessionWindow(sc.testStream(activities), TenMinutesGap)

  results should beEmpty
}
```

Nothing fancy, except one mystery method: `advanceWatermarkToInfinity()`.
In a nutshell the method tells: *all activities in the input stream have been already observed, calculate the sessions please*.
Unclear? If so, check the first [part](/blog/2022/01/28/stream-processing-part1/) of the series.

## Single session

> The scenario where all activities are aggregated into a single session.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The scenario in which all activities are aggregated into a single session.
```

```scala
"Activities from two clients" should "be aggregated into two simultaneous sessions" in runWithContext { sc =>
  val activities = testStreamOf[(User, Activity)]
    .addElementsAtTime("00:00:00", ("joe", "open app"))
    .addElementsAtTime("00:00:00", ("ben", "open app"))
    .addElementsAtTime("00:01:00", ("joe", "close app"))
    .addElementsAtTime("00:01:30", ("ben", "close app"))
    .advanceWatermarkToInfinity()

  val results = activitiesInSessionWindow(sc.testStream(activities), TenMinutesGap)

  results.withTimestamp should inOnTimePane("00:00:00", "00:11:00") {
    containSingleValueAtTime("00:10:59.999", 
      ("joe", Iterable("open app", "close app")))
  }

  results.withTimestamp should inOnTimePane("00:00:00", "00:11:30") {
    containSingleValueAtTime("00:11:29.999", 
      ("ben", Iterable("open app", "close app")))
  }
}
```

* Again, all result elements get end-of-window time
* End-of-window is calculated as the latest observed activity event time plus ten minutes gap
* The activities from each user are aggregated into the independent, two simultaneous sessions

## Single session with out-of-order activities

> Out of order events are the everyday life in the distributed systems.

Reviewer: Czy to nie kalka z polskiego?
A może taki idiom?
```suggestion
Out of order events are the bread and butter of the distributed systems.
```

The function `activitiesInSessionWindow()` should order the activities within the session by event time.

```scala
"Out-of-order activities" should "be aggregated into single session" in runWithContext { sc =>
  val activities = testStreamOf[(User, Activity)]
    .addElementsAtTime("00:01:00", ("joe", "close app"))
    .addElementsAtTime("00:00:00", ("joe", "open app"))
    .advanceWatermarkToInfinity()

  val results = activitiesInSessionWindow(sc.testStream(activities), TenMinutesGap)

  results.withTimestamp should inOnTimePane("00:00:00", "00:11:00") {
    containSingleValueAtTime("00:10:59.999", ("joe", 
      Iterable("open app", "close app")))
  }
}
```

* The activities in the session are ordered by activity event time
* The result element gets end-of-window time, ten minutes after the oldest event time 

> * The oldest event do not have to be necessarily the latest one

Reviewer: Tego nie rozumiem... Najstarsze zdarzenie nie musi być najświeższym?
A może chodziło o:
```suggestion
* The latest event does not have to be necessarily the last one
```

## Continues long-lasting session

Let's check if the continuous session is preserved for activities that span for a longer period of time but still within the allowed gap.

```scala
"Continuous activities" should "be aggregated into single session" in runWithContext { sc =>
  val activities = testStreamOf[(User, Activity)]
    .addElementsAtTime("00:00:00", ("joe", "open app"))
    .addElementsAtTime("00:01:30", ("joe", "show product"))
    .addElementsAtTime("00:03:00", ("joe", "add to cart"))
    .addElementsAtTime("00:09:30", ("joe", "checkout"))
    .addElementsAtTime("00:13:10", ("joe", "close app"))
    .advanceWatermarkToInfinity()

  val results = activitiesInSessionWindow(sc.testStream(activities), TenMinutesGap)

  results.withTimestamp should inOnTimePane("00:00:00", "00:23:10") {
    containSingleValueAtTime(
      "00:23:09.999",
      ("joe", Iterable("open app", "show product", "add to cart", "checkout", "close app")))
  }
}
```

* There is no gap longer than 10 minutes in the activities stream
* As expected, the single, continuous session is produced

> * Result element gets end-of-window time *00:23:09.999*, ten minutes more than the oldest observed event time

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Result element gets end-of-window time *00:23:09.999*, ten minutes more than the latest observed event time
```

## Interrupted long-lasting session

What if the gap between events is longer than ten minutes?

```scala
"Interrupted activities" should "be aggregated into two sessions" in runWithContext { sc =>
  val activities = testStreamOf[(User, Activity)]
    .addElementsAtTime("00:00:00", ("joe", "open app")
    .addElementsAtTime("00:01:30", ("joe", "show product"))
    .addElementsAtTime("00:03:00", ("joe", "add to cart"))
    .addElementsAtTime("00:13:00", ("joe", "checkout"))
    .addElementsAtTime("00:13:10", ("joe", "close app"))
    .advanceWatermarkToInfinity()

  val results = activitiesInSessionWindow(sc.testStream(activities), TenMinutesGap)

  results.withTimestamp should inOnTimePane("00:00:00", "00:13:00") {
    containSingleValueAtTime("00:12:59.999",
      ("joe", Iterable("open app", "show product", "add to cart")))
  }

  results.withTimestamp should inOnTimePane("00:13:00", "00:23:10") {
    containSingleValueAtTime("00:23:09.999", 
      ("joe", Iterable("checkout", "close app")))
  }
}
```

* The gap between "add to cart" and "checkout" is too long to produce the single session

> * Two independent sessions are produced

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Two consecutive sessions are created
```

* Result element always gets end-of-window time, ten minutes more than the oldest observed activity for the given session

> ## Late activity

Reviewer: W tym scenariusze brakuje mi trochę jawnego stwierdzenia, że dozwolone opóźnienie zdarzeń jest równe "0".

Sygnatura metody na początku artykułu tego nie zawiera (w sumie słusznie - żeby nie zaciemniać), ale może warto by przed przejściem do testu wtrącić zdanie, że rozpatrujemy przypadek z `allowedLateness = ZERO`?

Author: Słuszna uwaga, pomyślę jako to ograć. Analogicznie nie omawiam też jawnie domyślnego trigger-a, a zapewne warto.

  val activities = testStreamOf[(User, Activity)]
    .addElementsAtTime("00:00:00", ("joe", "open app"))
    .addElementsAtTime("00:01:30", ("joe", "show product"))
    .advanceWatermarkTo("00:13:00")
    .addElementsAtTime("00:03:00", ("joe", "add to cart")) // late activity
    .addElementsAtTime("00:09:30", ("joe", "checkout"))
    .addElementsAtTime("00:13:10", ("joe", "close app"))
    .advanceWatermarkToInfinity()

  val results = activitiesInSessionWindow(sc.testStream(activities), TenMinutesGap)

  results.withTimestamp should inOnTimePane("00:00:00", "00:11:30") {
    containSingleValueAtTime("00:11:29.999", 
      ("joe", Iterable("open app", "show product")))
  }

  results.withTimestamp should inWindow("00:00:00", "00:13:00") {
    beEmpty
  }

  results.withTimestamp should inOnTimePane("00:09:30", "00:23:10") {
    containSingleValueAtTime("00:23:09.999", 
      ("joe", Iterable("checkout", "close app")))
  }
}
```

* The activity "add to cart" at *00:03:00* is late event, watermark has been already advanced to *00:13:00*
* Late event is simply discarded, there is no result produced for window *[00:00:00, 00:13:00)*!

> * The first session is produces as expected, when watermark has passed allowed gap after the last observed event

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The first session is produced as expected, when watermark has passed allowed gap after the last observed event
```

    .addElementsAtTime("00:09:30", ("joe", "checkout"))
    .addElementsAtTime("00:13:10", ("joe", "close app"))
    .advanceWatermarkToInfinity()

  val results = activitiesInSessionWindow(
    sc.testStream(activities),
    TenMinutesGap,
    allowedLateness = Duration.standardMinutes(5))

  results.withTimestamp should inOnTimePane("00:00:00", "00:11:30") {
    containSingleValueAtTime("00:11:29.999", 
      ("joe", Iterable("open app", "show product")))
  }

  results.withTimestamp should inLatePane("00:00:00", "00:13:00") {
    containSingleValueAtTime("00:12:59.999", 
      ("joe", Iterable("add to cart")))
  }

  results.withTimestamp should inOnTimePane("00:00:00", "00:23:10") {
    containSingleValueAtTime("00:23:09.999", 
      ("joe", Iterable("checkout", "close app")))
  }
}
```

* The "add to cart" activity at *00:03:00* is late but within allowed lateness
* Nothing special to the first session window
* There is an additional session produced in the late pane, it contains only the late event
* The session window for late pane starts at *00:00:00* 
* Because the late event has closed the gap between the sessions, the second on-time session also starts at *00:00:00*

> Why are the activities from the first session not been preserved and counted into the second and third sessions?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Why have the activities from the first session not been preserved and counted into the second and third sessions?
```

  results.withTimestamp should inOnTimePane("00:00:00", "00:11:30") {
    containSingleValueAtTime("00:11:29.999", 
      ("joe", Iterable("open app", "show product")))
  }

  results.withTimestamp should inLatePane("00:00:00", "00:13:00") {
    containSingleValueAtTime("00:12:59.999", 
      ("joe", Iterable("open app", "show product", "add to cart")))
  }

  results.withTimestamp should inOnTimePane("00:00:00", "00:23:10") {
    containSingleValueAtTime("00:23:09.999", 
      ("joe", Iterable("open app", "show product", "add to cart", "checkout", "close app")))
  }
}
```

* The `accumulationMode` parameter is set to `ACCUMULATING_FIRED_PANES`
* The first session is produced as before
* The session in the late pane contains all activities from already fired, on-time pane
* Now, it is much easier to understand why late pane window starts at *00:00:00*
* There is also second on-time pane with all the events, the late event has closed the gap and the session with all observed activities is produced effectively

The aggregation in `ACCUMULATING_FIRED_PANES` mode could effectively produce some duplicates.
All downstream processing steps must be aware of that fact. 

> In the above scenario they could use the latest observed session as the most completed one. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the above scenario they could use the latest observed session as the most complete one. 
```

```scala
results.withTimestamp should inEarlyPane("00:00:00", "00:11:00") {
  containSingleValueAtTime("00:10:59.999", 
    ("joe", Iterable("0", "1")))
}
results.withTimestamp should inEarlyPane("00:00:00", "00:13:00") {
  containSingleValueAtTime("00:12:59.999", 
    ("joe", Iterable("0", "1", "2", "3")))
}
results.withTimestamp should inEarlyPane("00:00:00", "00:15:00") {
  containSingleValueAtTime("00:14:59.999", 
    ("joe", Iterable("0", "1", "2", "3", "4", "5")))
}
```

* The first speculative result is produced one minute after "0" activity, so it contains "0" and "1" activities
* The first pane emission resets the trigger, so the second speculative result is again produced 1 minute after "2" activity and contains activities from "0" to "3"
* There is also a third early pane, with all already observed activities
* The event time of the results is always the oldest observed event time plus the configured gap of ten minutes

On-time result:

```scala
results.withTimestamp should inOnTimePane("00:00:00", "00:15:00") {
  containSingleValueAtTime("00:14:59.999", 
    ("joe", Iterable("0", "1", "2", "3", "4", "5")))
}
```

* The on-time pane is produced when watermark has passed

> * Window and elements times are exactly like for the latest early-pane, because there has not been any new activity observed since the late pane was emitted

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Window and elements times are exactly like for the latest early-pane, because there has not been any new activity observed since the last early-pane was emitted
```

## Summary

Feel free to inspect [source code](https://github.com/mkuthan/stream-processing) to get the whole picture of the presented examples.
Below you will find the actual `activitiesInSessionWindow` implementation:

```scala
type User = String
type Activity = String

def activitiesInSessionWindow(
  activities: SCollection[(User, Activity)],
  gapDuration: Duration,
  allowedLateness: Duration = Duration.ZERO,
  accumulationMode: AccumulationMode = AccumulationMode.DISCARDING_FIRED_PANES,
  trigger: Trigger = DefaultTrigger.of()
): SCollection[(User, Iterable[Activity])] = {
  val windowOptions = WindowOptions(
    allowedLateness = allowedLateness,
    accumulationMode = accumulationMode,
    trigger = trigger,
  )
  
  activities
    .withTimestamp
    .map { case ((user, action), timestamp) => (user, (action, timestamp)) }
    .withSessionWindows(gapDuration, windowOptions)
    .groupByKey
    .mapValues(sortByTimestamp)
    .mapValues(withoutTimestamp)
}

private def sortByTimestamp(activities: Iterable[(Activity, Instant)]): Iterable[(Activity, Instant)] = {
  val ordering: Ordering[(Activity, Instant)] = Ordering.by { case (_, instant) => instant.getMillis }

>   actions.toSeq.sorted(ordering)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  activities.toSeq.sorted(ordering)
```

}

private def withoutTimestamp(activities: Iterable[(Activity, Instant)]): Iterable[Activity] =

>   actions.map(_._1)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  activities.map(_._1)
```
